# On Chess

My wife and I recently finished watching the Queens Gambit. I had heard that the top rated Netflix series had reinvigorated an interest in chess and (potentially) bought a whole new generation of players to the game. It also reminded me of one of the most interesting hobbies and the source of one of my proudest competitive achievements. Although those of you who know me may know that I played a lot of sport growing up, you may not be aware that of all the sports chess was one of my favourites.

The appeal was partly in the fact that chess tournaments were held in these 3 star hotels across Sydney. The types of hotels that were heavy on kitsch ornaments and *always* had a red carpet greeting our pre-teen selves. Hotels generally were exciting when you were a kid, even 3 star ones, moreso when you were chaperoned there by your parents. Adding to the feeling of being catered to was that the entrance foyer always had a large bowl of cookies / biscuits that were refilled throughout the day. Between the red carpet, the cookies and the hotel conference / ballrooms that we played in - chess was surprisingly glamorous to me at the time.

The other thing to look forward to when attending competitive chess tournaments were the dummy spits. What we chess players had in strategic guile and probabilistic thinking we made up for with occasional lapses in emotional intelligence. I had one such moment when during a primary school tournament a boy from the grade above played a ‘en passant ‘ against me, a move which I wasn’t familiar with at the time and which now that I had been introduced to it was very traumatizing. My tantrum was not of the throwing tables or chairs variety (although these were a staple in jnr chess circles) but I definitely cried and pleaded to no avail.

But back to my achievement. The chess tournaments were overseen by NSW Chess Association, who amazingly ranked the top 600 players or so in each division and age group and would send out a booklet to each registered player on a fortnightly or monthly basis. It was as if the association had one of the first high powered personal computers and wanted to put it to good use as no age group was not worth ranking into the several hundreds.  

I usually was in the top 30 - 80, pretty good considering I only had received some tutoring and didn’t practice a huge amount - though I consistently played in tournaments and did pretty well. However slots 30 to 80 were fairly interchangeable, we all were consistently good chess players but nothing special. The top 20 however was a different question. This is where the prodigies were. Whereas 30 - 80 was interchangeable, facing a Top 20 player was a surefire loss. 

Anyhow one week the entire top 20 must have been at some interstate or international tournament or perhaps had come down simultaneously with some communicable illness via the communal cookie jar in the hotel foyer, because when that month's chess rankings landed in my mailbox I had somehow slipped into the Top 20. Although in other sports I had won many first or second placed prizes this was by FAR the most difficult thing that I had achieved, albeit fleetingly and probably with a Stephen Bradbury stroke of luck that was unbeknownst to me. I wish I had kept the clipping, because I regressed immediately back to my comfortable but not spectacular range and never sniffed the Top 20 again.
0 comments on commit 444f150
@Damjanv1
 
 
