# Additive changes and critique of Balaji's Cloud Nation concept

I first came across Balaji Srinivasan when I took a course that he was presenting to which to this date is still one of the most interesting MOOC’s that I had taken. He also then periodically popped up offering words of wisdom on my social media feeds on a range of topics as diverse as the Covid-19 Pandemic to the growth and future potential of cryptocurrencies. Needless to say he was a original and critical thinker, and given that much of his ruminations were spent thinking about the potential future trajectory of nascent trends, and the cross-pollination of ideas I was not surprised to see him proposing how a formation of an online community could progressively lead to the formation of new countries / nation states.

In his latest post Balaji writes about how and why one could go about forming a new country. After briefly discussing why one would go about creating a new country and the advantages of doing so, before summarising the ways that currently are either considered to be the most feasible, or have historically been an avenue by which new nations are formed, Balajis proposes a new method. Organising online and in the cloud, and using the tools of the internet to build the basis off which more traditionally nation state things such as land acquisition and political representation can be achieved.

It is difficult to ascertain the feasibility of this proposal, however as a thought exercise, much in the way of Utopia, it is interesting to ponder. What I believe Balaji missed, or did not explicitly state is that creating this so called Cloud Nation and gaining representation through organising online and in the cloud primarily is that it has substantially lowers the barriers to entry than other new forms of nation creation such as seasteading and space exploration do not offer. 

This would allow the state to be diverse, and much more egalitarian - ideally increasing participation between members. It would allow members to purely organise around ideas solely and not the assets that they hold at the time of formation, and the connections provided by modern internet and blockchain infrastructure would allow for participation to be distributed to those that wish to participate - further entrenching these egalitarian ideals.

Another advantage not mentioned is that it could in theory level the playing field between individuals / global citizens and other entities that enjoy legal status and legally enshrined rights similar to individuals (i.e. corporations). Corporations currently have advantages whereby they are courted by smart nation states and are able to not only cross borders and set up operations in a new country, in a way that individuals simply cannot  Not only are they courted but once there - depending on their size, they can even flex some serious political leverage. Individuals on the other hand cannot move across borders as seamlessly as capital can, however creating digital borders would allow for this dynamic to extended to individuals. Individuals could theoretically exercise more choice, and begin to realise the same freedoms in movement as capital currently enjoys if a cloud state allowed them to align with a nation of their choice. Geography would no longer be destiny. 

There are other facets of cross border movement that such a nation state could theoretically solve.For example Immigrants do not have a ‘try-before-you-buy’ opportunity when making one of life’s biggest decisions. They simply migrate with the belief that the promise of a new land is as authentic as it seems often with the acknowledgement that they will be sacrificing relative prosperity and comfort for a generation or two at least. Migrant parents will make considerable sacrifices of their own for the benefit of their children 20 years down the line. 
Although we evangelise the positive outcomes this risk is not without its failures and difficulties  First generation migrants often have to leave careers, friends, opportunities and property behind along with experiencing racism for a generation or two if not indefinitely.

 A cloud state would allow new joiners to experience life, create connections, and determine the feasibility and appeal of the cloud state prior to physically moving to any land that it had acquired or allowing any previously acquired land to be absorbed into the nation state as suggested. You could be integrated digitally before you are integrated physically. This type of thinking if well executed would lead to competition to create the most desirable living standards for a new world where transitioning between borders could be easier.

Finally building a society online and in such a non-conventional way would allow for the nation state to scale in relative anonymity, essentially building in stealth mode until it acquires enough political & financial capital and size to be able to negotiate its existence and terms of trade and engagement with other (traditional) nation states.

Some limitations of the proposal that were not raised include the fact that the cloud state would be dependent on the cloud infrastructure (amongst other things) that would be owned by other nation states. It could be deplatformed unless it owned the platform upon which it built itself upon. This would obviously be a security and existential risk. The driving ethos of this proposed venture appears to be amongst other things, autonomy and no cloud nation state would be autonomous until it controls the means by which it could expand itself.

Furthermore the idea of acquiring land, however in the form of enclaves and not necessarily contiguously appears to be feasible if you are only planning to live your life solely in the cloud. One would assume that citizens would expect to organise to have services such as health care provided equal to or beyond the standards that they currently experience. What is less clear is how those services would scale in such a way to provide coverage for all the citizens once they join, and how this could be provided. Technology could solve some, but not all of these issues. Multilateral agreements may be necessary with more traditional states with which you shared land, however it would be hard to see how citizens would not hold minority status in these circumstances. 

Finally, a first mover advantage may be enjoyed by the first cloud collective that achieves nation state-hood, but once others see the model as replicable with their own tweaks, competition would ensue. This could potentially lead to any first mover advantage being short lived. It also could lead to extremely heightened transiency between an individual's association with a nation state. If the switching costs are low and options high as they would be in such a scenario, what would stop an individual from switching nation state affiliations every other year? Although on paper this ‘freedom’ would seem great, the pendulum would very much be on the side of individuals - potentially to the detriment of society.  it would make it difficult to build social fabric and cohesion needed to support and grow a society in the medium to long-term if affiliations could be changed so easily.

 Many have opined for example that a similar dynamic is occurring in the NBA with greater player movement - the greatness of any individual team has been diminished due to the inability to build the habits required to elevate to that level. If this were to be true - then this could have implications on security, economic growth and stability and a whole range of other issues.
